- One of the best strategies for dealing
with reducing latency on a microservices-based
system is to not rely on a purely
synchronous communication model.
Leveraging event driven asynchronous
communications is a fantastic way to improve
system health as well as support
long-term objectives of moving
large amounts of data over long distances
in a fairly timely fashion.
Asynchronous communications however are not easy,
and you need to put sufficient work
into ensuring that your communications reach
their destination and are processed in accordance
with predetermined tolerances.
Learning how to appropriately handle
and respond to error conditions is critical
to keeping the system healthy.
Most often when you hear mentions
of asynchronous communications
in a microservices architecture,
people are specifically referring
to event-driven microservices as a way to support
eventual consistency of the data.
In this model, the services put a message
into an asynchronous message broker
or a temporary data store and then drive events
from this new state.
The downstream event processors will process the data
and eventually cause the data to be stored
in its final data store.
Conversions will then occur through either
distributed data patterns or subsequent event processing.
While this model is the most common one discussed,
it is definitely not the only one.
Stream data platforms are a very strong pattern
when building out a large system,
especially with many different but interesting operations.
In a stream data platform, events are written
to a central message broker.
These events then trigger listener operations
that take action on that data if it applies to them.
These events can trigger operations that format the data,
cause other downstream events, or various other activities.
These stream data platforms, in my experience,
can be highly useful in large distributed systems
because often events trigger multiple operations
and not just one.
By leveraging a platform like this,
you can do more work with less overall stress
on the system which of course improves
overall performance, especially in activities like logging,
auditing, or inspections.
One of the most overlooked patterns in this space
from my experience is the transition
from pure synchronous operations
to asynchronous processing.
We are impatient by nature and we seem
to always want systems that have immediate feedback.
But it is not always needed.
Many times we can simply defer the processing
to occur in an asynchronous manner.
When we do this, we reduce the latency constraints
on the functions that actually are required
to be executed in real time.
Part of the goal to moving to asynchronous
operations is load reduction, but as I mentioned,
it isn't always just a simple move.
When moving to asynchronous operations,
you need to take care to handle error states correctly
and recover from them.
If messages cannot be processed for any reason,
you cannot simply ignore them.
Dead letter queues must be monitored
and action must be taken to process the messages,
even if it's manual processing.
Data should be routinely monitored for correctness
in an automated fashion.
And performance must be evaluated to ensure
that the message brokers are not getting behind.
Now I encourage you to take some real time
in your system design and investigate how leveraging
asynchronous communications can help
your team achieve scale.